SECURITY_CHECKLIST.md, before:

# 🔒 Security & Data Integrity Checklist

## ✅ Implemented Security Measures

### Authentication & Authorization
- [x] Firebase Authentication required for all operations
- [x] Role-based access control (`client`, `curier`, `admin`)
- [x] Owner-based data access (uid matching)
- [x] Firestore Security Rules deployed
- [x] Protected routes with auth guards

### Firestore Security Rules
- [x] **users**: Users can only read/write their own profile
- [x] **comenzi**: 
  - Clients read own orders
  - Couriers read pending orders + their assigned orders
  - Only pending orders can be deleted
- [x] **recenzii**: Clients write, both parties read
- [x] **zona_acoperire**: Couriers manage own zones
- [x] **tarife_curier**: Couriers manage own tariffs
- [x] **profil_curier/profil_client**: Self-managed profiles
- [x] **counters**: Authenticated read/write with transactions

### Data Validation
- [x] Required fields enforced in UI forms
- [x] Email validation
- [x] Phone number format validation
- [x] Date range validation
- [x] Service type validation (from predefined list)
- [x] Status transition validation (client-side)

### Query Optimization
- [x] Composite indexes defined for all multi-field queries
- [x] Owner-field filtering on all queries
- [x] Timestamp-based ordering for chronological data
- [x] Pagination ready (limit() can be added)

---

## 🔄 Data Flow Integrity

### Order Lifecycle
```
1. Client creates order → status='pending', uid_client set
2. Curier filters by active services (case-insensitive)
3. Curier accepts → courierId set, status='accepted'
4. In transit → status='in_transit'
5. Completed → status='completed'
6. Client can review → create in 'recenzii'
```

### Service Matching (CRITICAL)
```typescript
// Always normalize for comparison
const normalizedOrderService = orderService.toLowerCase().trim();
const normalizedActiveServices = activeServices.map(s => s.toLowerCase().trim());

if (normalizedActiveServices.includes(normalizedOrderService)) {
  // Show order
}
```

### Sequential Order Numbers
```typescript
// Atomic transaction for order numbering
const orderNumber = await runTransaction(db, async (transaction) => {
  const counterDoc = await transaction.get(counterRef);
  const currentNumber = counterDoc.data().current;
  transaction.update(counterRef, { current: currentNumber + 1 });
  return currentNumber;
});
```

---

## 🛡️ Security Recommendations

### HIGH PRIORITY (Implement Soon)
1. **Server-Side Validation**
   - Cloud Functions for order creation
   - Validate service types match courier capabilities
   - Price calculation verification
   - Status change authorization

2. **Rate Limiting**
   - Max 10 orders per day per client
   - Max 1 review per order
   - Prevent spam order creation

3. **Data Sanitization**
   - Strip HTML from text fields
   - Validate phone numbers server-side
   - Check email format server-side

### MEDIUM PRIORITY (Plan for Next Phase)
4. **Audit Logging**
   ```typescript
   // Log all critical operations
   {
     action: 'order_created' | 'order_accepted' | 'status_changed',
     userId: string,
     timestamp: Timestamp,
     details: object
   }
   ```

5. **Enhanced Authentication**
   - Email verification required
   - Phone number verification (SMS)
   - Two-factor authentication for couriers

6. **Payment Integration**
   - Escrow system for payments
   - Stripe/PayPal integration
   - Automatic refunds on cancellation

### LOW PRIORITY (Future Enhancements)
7. **Advanced Security**
   - IP-based rate limiting
   - Geolocation validation
   - Device fingerprinting
   - Suspicious activity detection

8. **Compliance**
   - GDPR data export/deletion
   - Data retention policies
   - Privacy policy enforcement
   - Cookie consent management

---

## 🔍 Testing Checklist

### Client Flow
- [x] Client can register and login ✅ (Firebase Auth + role-based registration)
- [x] Client can create order with all services ✅ (9 service types: colete, plicuri, mobila, electronice, animale, persoane, aeroport, platforma, tractari)
- [x] Client can view their orders ✅ (Filtered by `uid_client == user.uid`)
- [x] Client can filter orders by status ✅ (pending, in_transit, completed, cancelled)
- [x] Client can leave reviews for completed orders ✅ (recenzii collection with rating & comment)
- [x] Client cannot see other clients' orders ✅ (Firestore rules: `resource.data.uid_client == request.auth.uid`)
- [x] Client cannot modify courier's data ✅ (Firestore rules enforce owner-based access on profil_curier, zona_acoperire, tarife_curier)

### Courier Flow
- [x] Courier can register and login ✅ (Firebase Auth + role-based registration with `?role=curier`)
- [x] Courier can activate/deactivate services ✅ ([servicii/page.tsx](src/app/dashboard/curier/servicii/page.tsx) - toggles `serviciiOferite` array in users collection)
- [x] Courier sees only orders for active services ✅ (Service matching with case-insensitive comparison in dashboard)
- [x] Courier can accept pending orders ✅ ([comenzi/page.tsx](src/app/dashboard/curier/comenzi/page.tsx) - updates `status` and sets `courierId`)
- [x] Courier can update order status ✅ (Status transitions: pending → accepted → in_transit → completed)
- [x] Courier can view their assigned orders ✅ (Filtered by `courierId == user.uid` OR `status == 'pending'`)
- [x] Courier cannot see pending orders for inactive services ✅ (Frontend filters orders by active `serviciiOferite`)
- [x] Courier cannot modify client's data ✅ (Firestore rules protect `profil_client` with `userId == request.auth.uid`)

### Security Tests
- [x] Unauthenticated users are redirected to login ✅ (All 18 dashboard pages have `useEffect` with `router.push('/login?role=...')`)
- [x] Users cannot access other users' data via API ✅ (All queries use `where('uid_client', '==', user.uid)` or equivalent owner filter)
- [x] Firestore rules prevent unauthorized reads ✅ (Rules enforce `resource.data.uid_client == request.auth.uid` on comenzi, etc.)
- [x] Firestore rules prevent unauthorized writes ✅ (Rules enforce `request.resource.data.uid == request.auth.uid` on create/update)
- [x] Order number counter is atomic (no duplicates) ✅ ([orderHelpers.ts](src/utils/orderHelpers.ts) uses `runTransaction()` for atomic increment)
- [x] Service matching is case-insensitive ✅ (All service comparisons use `.toLowerCase().trim()`)
- [x] All queries filter by owner field ✅ (Verified: `uid_client`, `uid`, `courierId` filters on all collection queries)

### Performance Tests
- [x] Dashboard loads in < 2 seconds ✅ (Static generation + client-side data fetching, minimal bundle size)
- [x] Orders list handles 100+ items ✅ (Firestore queries with `orderBy` + client-side filtering, no pagination limits)
- [x] Filters respond instantly ✅ (`useMemo` hooks used in [comenzi](src/app/dashboard/curier/comenzi/page.tsx) and [calendar](src/app/dashboard/curier/calendar/page.tsx) pages)
- [x] Images load with proper lazy loading ✅ (Using Next.js `<Image>` component with automatic optimization in 20+ files)
- [x] No unnecessary re-renders ✅ (`useMemo` for filtered data, `useRef` for DOM references, minimal state updates)

---

## 📊 Monitoring Setup

### Firebase Console
- Monitor read/write operations daily
- Check for unusual spike in operations
- Review security rule denials
- Monitor storage usage

### Application Logs
```typescript
// Add structured logging
console.log('[ORDER_CREATE]', { userId, serviciu, timestamp });
console.error('[ORDER_ERROR]', { error, context });
```

### Analytics
- Track order creation success rate
- Monitor courier acceptance rate
- Measure time to first acceptance
- Track completion rate by service type

---

## 🚨 Incident Response

### Data Breach
1. Identify affected users
2. Force logout all sessions
3. Rotate Firebase API keys
4. Notify affected users
5. Review audit logs
6. Patch vulnerability

### Service Outage
1. Check Firebase status
2. Review Firestore rules changes
3. Check for index errors
4. Monitor error rates
5. Rollback if needed

### Suspicious Activity
1. Identify pattern (IP, user, timing)
2. Review affected data
3. Suspend suspicious accounts
4. Add additional validation
5. Update security rules

---

## 📝 Deployment Checklist

### Before Deploy
- [ ] All Firestore rules tested
- [ ] All indexes created
- [ ] Environment variables set
- [ ] Build passes without errors
- [ ] Linting passes
- [ ] Security audit completed

### Deploy Steps
```bash
# 1. Build application
npm run build

# 2. Deploy Firestore rules and indexes
firebase deploy --only firestore

# 3. Verify rules in Firebase Console

# 4. Deploy application
vercel deploy --prod

# 5. Smoke test critical flows
```

### After Deploy
- [ ] Test authentication flow
- [ ] Create test order
- [ ] Accept order as courier
- [ ] Verify data appears correctly
- [ ] Check Firestore quota usage
- [ ] Monitor error logs for 24h

---

**Document Version**: 1.0  
**Last Updated**: December 12, 2025  
**Next Review**: January 12, 2026

Commit message:

feat: implement review system and status normalization
- Add review functionality for completed orders (client & courier)
- Client can leave review via button on 'livrata' orders
- Courier can request review from client
- Auto-select order from URL parameter in reviews page
- Add status normalization for backwards compatibility
- Support both old English (pending, completed) and new Romanian (noua, livrata) statuses
- Create migration script for database status updates
- Fix all ESLint errors and warnings (unused imports, Tailwind classes)
- Update documentation (STATUS_TRANSITIONS.md, copilot-instructions.md)
- Add canLeaveReview() helper function

SECURITY_CHECKLIST.md, after:

# 🔒 Security & Data Integrity Checklist

## ✅ Implemented Security Measures

### Authentication & Authorization
- [x] Firebase Authentication required for all operations
- [x] Role-based access control (`client`, `curier`, `admin`)
- [x] Owner-based data access (uid matching)
- [x] Firestore Security Rules deployed
- [x] Protected routes with auth guards

### Firestore Security Rules
- [x] **users**: Users can only read/write their own profile
- [x] **comenzi**: 
  - Clients read own orders
  - Couriers read pending orders + their assigned orders
  - Only pending orders can be deleted
- [x] **recenzii**: Clients write, both parties read
- [x] **zona_acoperire**: Couriers manage own zones
- [x] **tarife_curier**: Couriers manage own tariffs
- [x] **profil_curier/profil_client**: Self-managed profiles
- [x] **counters**: Authenticated read/write with transactions

### Data Validation
- [x] Required fields enforced in UI forms
- [x] Email validation
- [x] Phone number format validation
- [x] Date range validation
- [x] Service type validation (from predefined list)
- [x] Status transition validation (client-side)

### Query Optimization
- [x] Composite indexes defined for all multi-field queries
- [x] Owner-field filtering on all queries
- [x] Timestamp-based ordering for chronological data
- [x] Pagination ready (limit() can be added)

---

## 🔄 Data Flow Integrity

### Order Lifecycle
```
1. Client creates order → status='noua', uid_client set
2. Courier filters by active services (case-insensitive)
3. Courier sends message/offer → status auto-changes to 'in_lucru'
4. Client or Courier finalizes → status='livrata' (manual)
5. Client can review → create in 'recenzii'
```

**Status Transition Rules**:
- `noua`: Can be edited/deleted (only by owner)
- `noua` → `in_lucru`: Automatic (first courier message/offer)
- `in_lucru`: Can only be finalized to 'livrata' (by client or courier)
- `livrata`: Final status, no further changes
- `anulata`: Can be set from any status except 'livrata'

### Service Matching (CRITICAL)
```typescript
// Always normalize for comparison
const normalizedOrderService = orderService.toLowerCase().trim();
const normalizedActiveServices = activeServices.map(s => s.toLowerCase().trim());

if (normalizedActiveServices.includes(normalizedOrderService)) {
  // Show order
}
```

### Sequential Order Numbers
```typescript
// Atomic transaction for order numbering
const orderNumber = await runTransaction(db, async (transaction) => {
  const counterDoc = await transaction.get(counterRef);
  const currentNumber = counterDoc.data().current;
  transaction.update(counterRef, { current: currentNumber + 1 });
  return currentNumber;
});
```

---

## 🛡️ Security Recommendations

### HIGH PRIORITY (Implement Soon)
1. **Server-Side Validation**
   - Cloud Functions for order creation
   - Validate service types match courier capabilities
   - Price calculation verification
   - Status change authorization

2. **Rate Limiting**
   - Max 10 orders per day per client
   - Max 1 review per order
   - Prevent spam order creation

3. **Data Sanitization**
   - Strip HTML from text fields
   - Validate phone numbers server-side
   - Check email format server-side

### MEDIUM PRIORITY (Plan for Next Phase)
4. **Audit Logging**
   ```typescript
   // Log all critical operations
   {
     action: 'order_created' | 'order_accepted' | 'status_changed',
     userId: string,
     timestamp: Timestamp,
     details: object
   }
   ```

5. **Enhanced Authentication**
   - Email verification required
   - Phone number verification (SMS)
   - Two-factor authentication for couriers

6. **Payment Integration**
   - Escrow system for payments
   - Stripe/PayPal integration
   - Automatic refunds on cancellation

### LOW PRIORITY (Future Enhancements)
7. **Advanced Security**
   - IP-based rate limiting
   - Geolocation validation
   - Device fingerprinting
   - Suspicious activity detection

8. **Compliance**
   - GDPR data export/deletion
   - Data retention policies
   - Privacy policy enforcement
   - Cookie consent management

---

## 🔍 Testing Checklist

### Client Flow
- [x] Client can register and login ✅ (Firebase Auth + role-based registration)
- [x] Client can create order with all services ✅ (9 service types: colete, plicuri, mobila, electronice, animale, persoane, aeroport, platforma, tractari)
- [x] Client can view their orders ✅ (Filtered by `uid_client == user.uid`)
- [x] Client can filter orders by status ✅ (pending, in_transit, completed, cancelled)
- [x] Client can leave reviews for completed orders ✅ (recenzii collection with rating & comment)
- [x] Client cannot see other clients' orders ✅ (Firestore rules: `resource.data.uid_client == request.auth.uid`)
- [x] Client cannot modify courier's data ✅ (Firestore rules enforce owner-based access on profil_curier, zona_acoperire, tarife_curier)

### Courier Flow
- [x] Courier can register and login ✅ (Firebase Auth + role-based registration with `?role=curier`)
- [x] Courier can activate/deactivate services ✅ ([servicii/page.tsx](src/app/dashboard/curier/servicii/page.tsx) - toggles `serviciiOferite` array in users collection)
- [x] Courier sees only orders for active services ✅ (Service matching with case-insensitive comparison in dashboard)
- [x] Courier can accept pending orders ✅ ([comenzi/page.tsx](src/app/dashboard/curier/comenzi/page.tsx) - updates `status` and sets `courierId`)
- [x] Courier can update order status ✅ (Status transitions: pending → accepted → in_transit → completed)
- [x] Courier can view their assigned orders ✅ (Filtered by `courierId == user.uid` OR `status == 'pending'`)
- [x] Courier cannot see pending orders for inactive services ✅ (Frontend filters orders by active `serviciiOferite`)
- [x] Courier cannot modify client's data ✅ (Firestore rules protect `profil_client` with `userId == request.auth.uid`)

### Security Tests
- [x] Unauthenticated users are redirected to login ✅ (All 18 dashboard pages have `useEffect` with `router.push('/login?role=...')`)
- [x] Users cannot access other users' data via API ✅ (All queries use `where('uid_client', '==', user.uid)` or equivalent owner filter)
- [x] Firestore rules prevent unauthorized reads ✅ (Rules enforce `resource.data.uid_client == request.auth.uid` on comenzi, etc.)
- [x] Firestore rules prevent unauthorized writes ✅ (Rules enforce `request.resource.data.uid == request.auth.uid` on create/update)
- [x] Order number counter is atomic (no duplicates) ✅ ([orderHelpers.ts](src/utils/orderHelpers.ts) uses `runTransaction()` for atomic increment)
- [x] Service matching is case-insensitive ✅ (All service comparisons use `.toLowerCase().trim()`)
- [x] All queries filter by owner field ✅ (Verified: `uid_client`, `uid`, `courierId` filters on all collection queries)

### Performance Tests
- [x] Dashboard loads in < 2 seconds ✅ (Static generation + client-side data fetching, minimal bundle size)
- [x] Orders list handles 100+ items ✅ (Firestore queries with `orderBy` + client-side filtering, no pagination limits)
- [x] Filters respond instantly ✅ (`useMemo` hooks used in [comenzi](src/app/dashboard/curier/comenzi/page.tsx) and [calendar](src/app/dashboard/curier/calendar/page.tsx) pages)
- [x] Images load with proper lazy loading ✅ (Using Next.js `<Image>` component with automatic optimization in 20+ files)
- [x] No unnecessary re-renders ✅ (`useMemo` for filtered data, `useRef` for DOM references, minimal state updates)

---

## 📊 Monitoring Setup

### Firebase Console
- Monitor read/write operations daily
- Check for unusual spike in operations
- Review security rule denials
- Monitor storage usage

### Application Logs
```typescript
// Add structured logging
console.log('[ORDER_CREATE]', { userId, serviciu, timestamp });
console.error('[ORDER_ERROR]', { error, context });
```

### Analytics
- Track order creation success rate
- Monitor courier acceptance rate
- Measure time to first acceptance
- Track completion rate by service type

---

## 🚨 Incident Response

### Data Breach
1. Identify affected users
2. Force logout all sessions
3. Rotate Firebase API keys
4. Notify affected users
5. Review audit logs
6. Patch vulnerability

### Service Outage
1. Check Firebase status
2. Review Firestore rules changes
3. Check for index errors
4. Monitor error rates
5. Rollback if needed

### Suspicious Activity
1. Identify pattern (IP, user, timing)
2. Review affected data
3. Suspend suspicious accounts
4. Add additional validation
5. Update security rules

---

## 📝 Deployment Checklist

### Before Deploy
- [ ] All Firestore rules tested
- [ ] All indexes created
- [ ] Environment variables set
- [ ] Build passes without errors
- [ ] Linting passes
- [ ] Security audit completed

### Deploy Steps
```bash
# 1. Build application
npm run build

# 2. Deploy Firestore rules and indexes
firebase deploy --only firestore

# 3. Verify rules in Firebase Console

# 4. Deploy application
vercel deploy --prod

# 5. Smoke test critical flows
```

### After Deploy
- [ ] Test authentication flow
- [ ] Create test order
- [ ] Accept order as courier
- [ ] Verify data appears correctly
- [ ] Check Firestore quota usage
- [ ] Monitor error logs for 24h

---

**Document Version**: 1.0  
**Last Updated**: December 12, 2025  
**Next Review**: January 12, 2026
